Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. In today's video,
we're moving towards understanding the
Hindu-Arabic framework for numbers, but
I'd like to do that by bringing together earlier
work that we did on poly numbers—our versions of
polynomials—and connecting that with what we've
been discussing about vexels relatively recently.
We started talking about poly numbers, which are
just another name for polynomials essentially,
in the video of Math Foundations 57 and the ones
following that. The basic idea is very simple:
we have our various number systems,
which are a little bit different from
what we're calling things now. In
particular, the natural numbers 0,
1, 2, 3, we used to call num plus, and
now we're just referring to that as nat.
So here is the main definition: a positive
poly number is a list of positive numbers,
in other words, of natural numbers,
written vertically with a bracket on top,
just like this. All right, so it's a list
of natural numbers with a bracket on top,
and that is a positive poly number. These
entries are all natural numbers. There was a
little bit of ambiguity or flexibility in the way
we specify a poly number in the sense that we can
add additional zeros at the end, and we agree
that this does not change the poly number. So,
for example, the poly number (3, 1, 4) is the
same as the poly number (3, 1, 4, 0). All right,
so having defined those things, we can then do
some arithmetic with them, and addition is very
straightforward. Basically, the addition is just
a component-wise addition where, if necessary,
you add enough zeros to the shorter one so
that we have numbers to add all the way down.
A lot more subtle was the notion of
multiplication of polynomials, given
by this relatively complicated formula. So if P
is, say, a poly number consisting of entries Pᵢ,
and Q is the poly number consisting of entries
Qᵢ, and we're indexing from zero—so P₀ on top,
then P₁, then P₂, and so on—then their product
P times Q is that poly number R given by R₀,
R₁, R₂, and so on, where the Rₙs are given by
the following formula: Rₙ is obtained by taking
the sum over all k and l, natural numbers that
add up to n, and the thing that we're actually
summing is the product of Pₖ with Qₗ. So we
take all possible products of things in the
list so that the two indices sum up to the
index that we're interested in over here.
So, for example, if we want to multiply
(2, 3) by (1, 5, 4), then we get this:
(2, 13, 23, 12). The way we get that is 2 times 1
is 2—that's the zero level. Then at the one level,
we get that by multiplying a zero with a one or a
one with a zero, so 2 plus 11 is 13. At level 2,
we get that by maybe choosing a zero and a
two, taking that product, or a one and a one,
that product, or a two and a one at that
product—that last one would be 0—so we'd
get 8 plus 15 is 23. And the third one would be
taking the one position here and the two position
and multiplying them to give us 12. Okay, so
this is a non-obvious kind of multiplication,
but of course, once we recognize that these
are just ordinary polynomials in disguise,
then this is just the usual product of
polynomials rewritten in this language.
And then we saw that this particular poly number
(0, 1) plays a kind of special role—we gave it
the name alpha—and that allowed us then to write
a general poly number, say something like (1, 3,
2), in terms of powers of alpha, so as 1 plus 3
alpha plus alpha squared, where the one represents
alpha to the zero, so representing that top
thing there. So this is the alpha, and this
is the alpha squared, and alpha cubed and so on
would be just further on down here. So here's
how we then recover the usual polynomial aspect of
things: our poly number on this side doesn't have
any variables in it. Over here, we recognize
that's a familiar kind of polynomial object,
but it has this variable alpha in it. And what we
want to do is we want to avoid having to say what
precisely our variable is—that's a little bit
of a tricky thing in mathematics. What is the
variable x? What's the difference between the
variable x and the variable y or the variable
t? So defining precisely what a variable is,
is problematic, and we can get around that by
just playing this game of really recognizing that
it's the coefficients that are the crucial thing
in specifying the poly number or the polynomial,
and then we can actually recover the variable—or
at least one variable—by this particular
choice of sort of a standard poly number.
Now, the other main ingredient that I want to
bring into the story here are these vexels that
we were talking about in the context of maxels and
linear algebra and matrices. So a vexel was a kind
of generalization of a vector—a somewhat larger
concept, a somewhat more open-ended concept—and it
arose from a prior understanding of a term called
a singleton. So the definition of a singleton is
that it's a one-list from natural numbers—this
was laid out, say, in Math Foundations 171—and I
remind you that for us now, nat when we say
natural numbers, does include zero. Okay,
so we are actually extending what we did last time
a little bit in that, well, we're now considering
natural numbers as being slightly bigger than it
was before. So that's what a singleton is—it's
just basically a one-list, that is, with one
element, and that element has to be a natural
number, zero, one, two, three, something like
that. And then a vexel is defined to be an M-set
of singletons—so an unordered collection
of singletons where repetition is allowed.
For example, this thing here—that is a vexel.
There's a singleton, there's another one, there's
another one, there's another one, there's another
one, there's a few repeats there—the order doesn't
matter, you can see that by the fact there's no
commas. So that's a multiset of singletons—that
is a vexel. And then we also talked about rather
particular vexels, sort of like basis vexels,
if you like, where now we're going to call them
e₀, e₁, e₂. Before, we just considered e₁, e₂,
and so on, but we're including zero now, so we
have to enlarge our story a little bit. So e₀
is the particular vexel with just one singleton
in it, namely the singleton which is the list
containing zero. e₁ is the one vexel that has the
singleton consisting of the list containing one,
and e₂ is the vexel whose single singleton is
the list containing two, and so on. Okay, so yes,
that's singletons and vexels—a very nice kind
of data structure orientation towards vectors.
So now to connect these vexels, which are
multisets, with the more standard idea of a
vector as essentially a list, we played the
following game: we had a look at a vexel,
like say this one here, and we observed that the
objects here are in some sense naturally ordered
because the objects are essentially one-list
from natural numbers, and natural numbers are
naturally ordered—there's zero, and then there's
one, and then there's two, and so on. So what we
can do is we can specify this M-set by creating
a multiplicity list for it. We've seen in other
situations that it's a useful kind of thing to
do—to have an M-set and then to represent it,
give an alternate way of thinking about it, as
a list that records how many of various things
appear. So this thing here we could represent by
this, well, kind of like a list or actually a row
freeze kind of diagram: (2, 0, 3, 2), the two
representing how many singleton zeros we have,
the zero here representing how many singleton ones
we have, how many singleton twos we have—there are
three of them right there—and how many singleton
threes we have—there are those two there. Or we
could represent the same thing by a column kind
of vector, by a column freeze display: (2, 0,
3, 2). So it's a matter of convention whether
we would prefer to represent this thing with a
row object or a column object. And we also
note that the zeros at the end are kind of
optional—we could also think about representing
this by including a zero here representing that
there's zero for singletons, maybe another zero
representing zero for singletons, and so on.
So you can see now there's an obvious connection
between this and the poly number story, right? A
poly number was essentially just exactly
like this, right? So there must be some
connection—there's obviously a connection between
poly numbers and vexels, and that's interesting,
I think, for us. And we just point out
that vexels, because they're multisets,
they can be added, because we can add any
two multisets, so we just loop them all
together. So if V and W are vexels, then
we can form V + W. We can multiply V by 2,
we can take a linear combination like
3V + 4W—these are all easily defined
because V and W are vexels—they're multisets.
So we gain a lot of infrastructure for free by
having our objects be multisets. This is
a kind of theme that's underlying a lot
of what I've been doing and will be doing
in the next, in the last few dozen videos.
So now we want to move towards bringing in the
third kind of objects that we're interested in,
which are Hindu-Arabic numbers,
and we want to kind of bring all
of these three things together into
the same pie—poly numbers, vexels,
and Hindu-Arabic numbers. So it turns out
that essentially the same objects are good
for describing any three of those things—a
natural synergy between these three things.
So to move in that direction, we need to talk
about how we're going to multiply vexels,
and we're going to start doing that by
explaining how to multiply singletons,
because vexels are M-sets of singletons. If we
know how to multiply singletons, hey, we know
how to multiply M-sets of them automatically—in
other words, we know how to multiply vexels.
So the definition of the multiplication of
singletons is rather surprising, perhaps,
at least if you don't know where we're heading
towards. Okay, so we have two singletons here,
the singleton n, the singleton m, and n and
m are necessarily natural numbers—zero, one,
two, three, four, etc.—two of those
things. And we're going to define
the product of the singleton n times the
singleton m to be the singleton n plus m,
where this is just the usual addition of natural
numbers. This is a surprising definition—we're
defining a multiplication in terms of an
underlying addition. Actually, it reminds us
perhaps a little bit about the tropical—doesn't
it? That kind of thing was going on there too.
All right, so notice that singleton multiplication
is automatically commutative and associative
because the addition in natural numbers is. And
now we simply extend this multiplication to a
multiplication of vexels, because vexels
are M-sets of singletons, so if we know
how to multiply singletons, then we know how to
multiply vexels automatically. So let me remind
you about the general philosophy of multiplying
M-sets: if here is some diagram for an M-set,
and here's another M-set, and we happen to
know how to multiply the objects in here
by the objects in there, then here's how
diagrammatically we multiply the M-sets:
we just take all possible products between objects
in here and objects in here. So we form a new
M-set which consists of, in this case, A times
D, A times E, B times D, B times E, C times D,
C times E. So in this case, it was going to
be three times two, six objects in this M-set.
So that's a general principle that we do, no
matter what, in terms of multiplying M-sets.
So multiplying vexels is now straightforward.
So here's a vexel V, here's another vexel W,
we need to multiply them. The product is going to
be defined in terms of the underlying products of
the singletons contained in there, and we know
that that product is determined essentially
by the addition of the numbers inside the
singletons. So when we multiply this singleton by
this singleton—zero times one—the singleton zero
times the singleton one, we get the singleton one
because zero plus one is one. And similarly, this
times this one is this, this times this is this,
and then this times this is that, this times this
is that, this times this is that, and this two
times that one is another three—two times three,
that'll be the five. And two times three is the
five—whenever I want to say two times three is
five, I don't really mean the number two times
the number three is the number five. I rather mean
the singleton two times the singleton three is the
singleton five. Okay, and we can represent this
by thinking about the corresponding pictures,
descriptions of these vexels in terms
of row or column freeze type vectors.
So this thing here, this vexel, is described
by (2, 0, 1)—there's two zeros, 0, 1, and 1,
2. This one here is described by (0, 1, 0,
2)—there are zero zeros, a one, one, zero twos,
and two threes. And this one here is given by
this thing here. And then if you think about it
for a little while, you can convince yourself
that this product here is in fact exactly the
same as poly number multiplication—these
things look like poly numbers. You have
a green border here instead of a bracket up
on top, but otherwise, they're just the same.
And you can check that this is exactly the same
as corresponding poly number multiplication. So
this is another way of thinking about poly number
multiplication—it's really generated by this very
simple multiplication of singletons—it's
really only that one equation involved.
Okay, so we're seeing that there's a very
close connection between vexels and poly
numbers—they're almost the same thing. And
here are some of the laws for the arithmetic
with vexels that we can easily deduce from
our definitions. And in fact, these laws
are almost automatic now—there's not any serious
difficulty in seeing why they're true. So if V,
W, and U are vexels, and say N and M happen to
be natural numbers, then we have commutativity
of addition and associativity of addition,
because the addition of vexels is basically
just M-set addition, and we know that's
commutative. We know that we can multiply,
say, a sum V + W by some natural number N, and
that's the same as N times V plus N times W.
With regard to our multiplication, well,
the commutativity and the associativity of
the multiplication follows immediately from
the commutativity and associativity of the
multiplication at the singleton level, which is a
consequence of the commutativity and associativity
for natural number addition. We have some other
laws having to do with how numbers multiply
vexels, which are pretty straightforward. We have
the important distributive laws, and these, again,
are just natural consequences of the fact that
we've defined our multiplication in an M-set kind
of way, in a multiset orientation depending
on an interior multiplication of elements.
So whenever you have such a situation,
these distributive laws are automatic.
And it's useful to observe that we
have a special vexel, the zero vexel,
which is just the empty M-set, because vexels are
M-sets, so there's an empty M-set, and that zero
vexel satisfies that when you add it to anything,
you get the anything, and when you multiply zero
times V in either order, you get zero. So it sort
of acts like zero does. So it's very pleasant that
these laws of arithmetic are almost automatic
here—the way we've set things up, they just
fall nicely into place, and essentially no work
is required to understand them, to prove them.
And there's also a distinguished vexel, simple
but distinguished vexel—this vexel (0, 1),
which officially is the M-set consisting of just
the singleton with one in it. And previously we
called that α₁, but now we see that it plays
exactly the same role as alpha in the context
of poly numbers. So in other words, we can now
introduce alpha in this vexel context by saying,
let's agree that this particular thing is alpha.
In other words, we're defining e₁ to be alpha.
Well, then if you square it, you square this
thing here—you have to add one plus one, you
get the vexel which has a single singleton with
a two, alpha cubed will be the singleton three,
and so on. And so now we can write any vexel V in
terms of essentially two equivalent forms—in the
form as a linear combination of e₀, e₁, e₂, up to
eₖ, as well as e₀, or correspondingly in terms of
powers of alpha, alpha to the zero, alpha to the
one, alpha to the two, and so on, out to say aₖ
times alpha to the k, where we also introduced
alpha to the zero to mean this e₀ vexel here.
So we have a kind of linear algebra point
of view on vexels represented by this,
or we have a poly number or polynomial point
of view towards vexels represented by this.
And this is very nice to have these
two different aspects of things sitting
inside the same structure—that means we can do
polynomial kinds of manipulations or thinking,
and we can do linear algebra kinds of thinking
in the same context, so that linear algebra
and the calculus kind of can interact more
freely and pleasantly in this kind of setup.
So by introducing this multiplication of
vexels, we are getting this convergence
of fundamental mathematical objects—vectors
and polynomials—they become essentially the
same kinds of things. So this is a traditional
vector, (3, 1, 2, 0, -5), and now we know that,
well, we should really think about that probably
in terms of a vexel rather than as a vector. And
when we do that, then we naturally can
associate it to the vexel written as 3
plus alpha plus 2 alpha squared plus 5 alpha
to the four. So vector, polynomial—some kind
of connection there. And we realize that both
of these objects are just manifestations of the
underlying object, which is neither a list nor
a polynomial, but rather this underlying M-set.
Okay, so the underlying M-set has three zeros, a
single one, a couple of twos, no threes, and five
fours, and it's really at this multiset level that
the operations become simplest to define and the
laws are easiest to verify. So mathematically,
this is where things want to live. Okay,
the interpretations of this object as a vector,
or as a polynomial, or as a poly number, or as
something else—maybe a column vector rather than a
row vector, for example—these are interpretations
that we bring to this underlying object,
which is just a data structure, a multiset.
In our next video, we want to now connect
more closely with the Hindu-Arabic story.
How do Hindu-Arabic numbers
and the usual arithmetic that
we're very familiar with slot into this
situation? We'll explain that next time.
I hope you'll join me for that. I'm
Norman Wildberger, thanks for listening.